hey it's your friend mel and welcome to the mel robbins podcast so i was scrolling through tiktok the other day and this 1 video stopped me in my tracks it was a video by a young woman named avi and her handle if you wanna check her out is being and becoming avi and she said something that really struck me so i played it again basically she said 1 of the reasons why so many of us don't like how we look is because human beings were never meant to see themselves this much just stop and think about that it's true isn't it we're not supposed to be staring at ourselves all the time whether it's on zoom or taking selfies or scrolling through everyone else's curated perfect looking lives and that's exactly why our conversation today is
so important you and i are about to have a raw unfiltered talk unlike anything we've ever had before on this podcast because today you and i are gonna talk about something that affects every single 1 of us even if you don't say it out loud body image self talk picking yourself apart those quiet moments of comparison and shame that shape how you see yourself and how that impacts the way you're showing up in the world maybe for you it's acne that makes you want to just stay inside your apartment maybe it's a part of your body that you've spent years hiding or hating or maybe it's something you can't change your height your complexion your body shape your hair texture you've convinced yourself that because of it you're somehow less worthy of love connection or confidence if any of that hits close to home for you or for someone you love i want you to hear me loud and clear you are not alone if you've ever felt like you're not good enough not attractive enough not lovable because of how you look if you're tired of comparing yourself to filtered faces and highlight reels if you've ever looked in the mirror and thought i wish i could change that then this episode is for you and it's for the people that you care about that are struggling to love themselves as they are because today we're talking about confidence talking about body image and you're also gonna learn about something that researchers call the otoscopic phenomenon wait till you hear about this and we're gonna also talk about this sense that you're trapped in a body that you just don't like and how that impacts comparison shame self worth how that may make you hide yourself when you don't like how you look and most importantly today we're talking about healing this is the conversation i wish i had had years ago because what you're about to hear it's gonna change the way you think about how you look and how you speak to yourself forever
hey it's your friend mel and welcome to the mel robbins podcast i am so excited that you're here i cannot wait for today's conversation and of all it's always such an honor to spend time together and to be with you and if you're new to the podcast i also wanted to take a moment and personally welcome you to the mel robbins podcast family i'm excited that you're here for the conversation today and because you made the time to listen to this particular episode here's what i know about you i know that you not only value your time but you also want to feel more confident and you wanna know how to accept yourself and learn how to love who you are as you are and if you're here right
now because somebody shared this episode with you i wanna point something out it means that they care deeply about you and they want you to hear something and learn from some experts some unbelievable information that is gonna help you value yourself and be even more confident and you deserve that and i think it's awesome that you have people in your life that care about you like that because today's conversation that we're gonna have it's a really important 1 and i was inspired to do this because i sat down with a person by the name of jake chane if you don't know jake trust me every single 20 and every high schooler in your life knows exactly who jake shane is he is a comedian who is blowing up everywhere in fact he just won a webby award for best comedic creator he is on a sold out tour right
now all across the united states he has a hit podcast called therapists huge youtube and tiktok following and i had the honor of sitting down with jake and being on his podcast and when we sat down together holy cow he opened up in a way that he's never opened up before he got so real he said that he thinks he's ugly he hates how he looks he just hates that he's short he obsesses over his body and then he shared this painful story about when all of these feelings of self hatred and body image started and i thought to myself how many of us have a story like this you know this moment when somebody said something to you or you walked in a room and suddenly you felt like you were the tallest or the shortest or you didn't look like anybody else in there and you felt like you didn't belong and you started believing there was something wrong with you your height your skin your stomach your face the acne hair lack of hair i mean who hasn't looked in the mirror and thought i hate this i hate how i look why do i look like this i wish i could look like that
now it's normal to have a thought like that every once in a while but when those thoughts become the soundtrack in your mind when they stop you from showing up or from wearing a bathing suit or jumping in the photo with your friends or going to the beach or going out on a date or putting yourself out there when the thoughts about your body or your acne steal your confidence and they make you believe that you're not smart enough or worthy of love and happiness because of how you look that's a problem and i know you would agree that even though we know it's a problem nobody really knows how to fix this right well that conversation that i had with jake shane on his podcast about body image it got me thinking about the fact that he said out loud what
so many people including you feel privately so i thought i wanna go deeper into this topic and that's what you and i are gonna do today and that's why i'm excited that you're here and i'm excited that you're gonna take the time to listen to this and that you're also gonna take the time to share this with people in your life where you're like gosh i wish they could just really see what i see why don't they see how beautiful they are why are they constantly hating on themselves and i wanted you to understand like i wanted to understand why do so many of us feel this way and more importantly what do you do about it
so for today's episode i'm doing something really special i wanna explain what you're about to hear after my conversation with jake shane i reached out to not 1 but 2 world renowned psychiatrists columbia university's doctor judith joseph and harvard medical school's doctor ashwini nadkarni these 2 experts are gonna walk you through the topics of body image self acceptance and confidence and it is so important for you to hear from the very start if you don't like how you look if you think you're ugly if you think if only you could change certain aspects of your appearance your chin your nose your this your that oh well then you'd be happier our experts will tell you this is normal and you are also gonna learn how life in the modern world is impacting your body image and your self confidence
so much more than you even realize you're gonna learn about the connection between constantly seeing yourself on zoom and selfies online how that is negatively affecting your self image and your mental health and most importantly you know this is the mel robbins podcast so you're not leaving here without simple things that you can do backed by research and there are in fact 4 steps that our world renowned experts are gonna walk you through that you can start to do as you're listening to our experts explain them these are the steps that will help you learn how to accept and love yourself particularly if you hate how you look because i want you to hear something loud and clear from your friend mel you're not broken in fact you are beautiful you may not see it but i do and
so do the people that love you and my mission with our conversation today is to get you to stop picking yourself apart and to stop caring so much about what other people may think and learn how to be kinder more compassionate and more confident in seeing and celebrating your unique beautiful self and 1 more thing jake if you're listening i love you i am so proud of you and thank you thank you for being brave enough to share your story and for giving us all permission to listen and to talk about this
so let me set up how we're gonna dive into the topic you're gonna hear jake shane talk about how much he hates his looks and how it is impacting him and dating because 1 of the things that he really wants is to be in a relationship and you're also gonna hear jake open up about how his height and deep insecurities make him feel like a real relationship not gonna happen but let me be very clear this is not a dating episode this is a deeper conversation it's about something most of us carry quietly and constantly in the background it's about the thing you hate about yourself and
so i want you to stop and think about that 1 thing is it your complexion your body your teeth your thighs your voice your face the way it looks in photos your hair that thing that you constantly 0 in on and rip apart that thing that makes you wanna hide or not smile or not speak up at work because we can be honest with 1 another most of us are not walking around thinking oh my god i'm just so beautiful today you're walking around thinking i look hideous i'm this i'm that i'm not enough my outfit blows i wish i looked like this but what's really going on underneath all this criticism is deep down you're afraid that what you look like is gonna get in the way of the life you want you've convinced yourself that you're the problem and when that belief takes root when you think you're too ugly too different too short too much acolymy too far gone too old too this too saggy too baggy it doesn't just keep you from love it keeps you from life that craving for connection whether it's with a romantic partner or friends or being seen at work or just being somebody who gets you it often masks something even more powerful a deeper need to feel worthy you deserve that you deserve to feel like you're allowed to take up space to be seen and to be celebrated and to stop apologizing for your body
so that's where we're going today because here's what i believe you are not ugly you're not unlovable and if you ever felt like you don't deserve the things you want whether it's a relationship or intimacy or just someone to hold your hand i want you to stay with me because we're talking about the relationship you have with yourself and how to finally stop being the bully in your own head so let's begin where the conversation with jake shane began see jake admitted something to me jake said the thing that he wants most in life is a relationship and
so then i asked him to describe what would the relationship that he has in his mind what would that feel like he paused and he said i don't know i want the relationship to make me feel confident and i would like it to like give me more life experience i wanna be able to lay down with someone and watch tv but also to feel romantic with them he knows what he wants but he's not sure how it would feel because here's the truth it's really hard to ask for what you want when deep down you don't believe you deserve it and if you ever felt like that if you ever avoided the mirror stood in the back of a photo or laughed off a compliment because you just couldn't believe it was true keep listening you have to believe that you're worthy of being fully seen and that being seen this isn't insecurity that's stopping you it's self protection you're afraid if somebody sees you naked or they see you without your makeup on or they see that you're actually bald and not the guy in the photo that you posted online that they're gonna reject you i mean it makes total sense when you carry shame or judgment about your body your past your face or the 1 thing you hate about yourself it feels safer to keep people at arm's length right because then you don't have to risk rejection but that same armor that's protecting you as you act cool and you cross your arms and you put on the makeup and the perfect outfit and you always have a towel around you because you don't want them to see you naked it also keeps love out and that's why this moment with jake hit me
so hard see i asked jake well if you know what you want jake what's the biggest issue when it comes to dating this is what jake shane had to say
i feel my main issue with dating is i am so insecure mhmm i don't know how i'm gonna share i feel like when you're in a relationship you like share your body with someone almost like you have to like be so vulnerable uh-huh and i struggle so much with like to to be frank like being like naked with someone
have you ever been in a long term committed relationship ever and is it is part of it because you're uncomfortable being naked with somebody
yes i would say that's a huge huge reason because it's how i carry myself like i don't give off that like i want to take off my clothes and be with someone
wow never been in a long term committed relationship because you're uncomfortable being naked with someone that sucks and i have a feeling that you or somebody that you love can relate to that because the truth is most people don't say that out loud most of us kind of keep the lights off and slink off to the bathroom most of us kind of pull our clothes together and hide our bodies but that's exactly what jake shane's talking about and that kind of insecurity it doesn't just make you self conscious it makes you hide and it makes you feel unworthy of the person that you're with because when you're shrinking away from the very things that you want most whether it's love connection partnership because deep down there's this fear if they really saw me if they knew the real me they wouldn't want me that's why i wanted to bring in 2 world renowned experts to help us really unpack what's going on because jake shane's not the only person that feels this way he's just got the courage and the confidence to talk about it because he's probably sick and tired of letting this hold him back and i want you to hold on to the thing that you're judging yourself around the ways in which you're shrinking as you listen to the experts who are gonna join in on the conversation and our experts are doctor judith joseph who is a double board certified psychiatrist she is a leading mental health researcher and the author of the brand new bestseller high functioning she's also a podcast favorite around here on the mel robbins podcast and doctor ashwini who is a professor at harvard medical school and a board certified psychiatrist at mass general brigham specializes in anxiety depression ocd ptsd and adhd she is also the associate medical director of brigham psychiatric specialties and interim vice chair for the faculty affairs in the department of psychiatry
now both doctor ashwini and doctor joseph are here to help unpack these topics further for you and me so let's start with what actually is body language and doctor ashwini requested that i call her doctor ash so doctor ash why are we constantly seeing ourselves through this critical lens
i think it's helpful to define what we mean by body image issues when people experience negative body image what we mean by that is that there's a difference between what they view as their real selves and what their idealized self is there's this concept of who they think they are and who they think they should be now with negative body image there are a number of different influential factors gender age race ethnicity all of those can play a role but sociocultural factors can also be influential for instance or social values and our cultural norms
now as children age their family members may initially play a role in their body image but after some time they're going to be exposed to their peer groups and then they're going to start consuming media for instance the tv that they watch the movies that they view the books that they read the magazine ads and of course social media consumption they're gonna be exposed to that concept of the idealized body image and then that difference between their real self and their idealized self is gonna be that much more prominent wow there was a lot to unpack in that explanation from doctor ash but as you listen didn't she just put words to something that you feel but you don't know how to explain and i wanna highlight a couple things the fact that this is really a issue where you have a difference between who you are and reality and this idealized version in your mind that you think you should be
so when you're talking about that in the context of body image it's like what you look like versus what you think you should look like and that gap between the real self that's you and this idealized fantasy self that you have in your mind this gap is where all the pain lives this is where you and i pick ourselves apart i look like this but i wanna look like that this is where you compare it's why you put filters on your face it's why you freeze when people call on you at work because you don't wanna be seen you think you should look and sound different what doctor ash is pointing out is that you and i constantly hold this idealized version of ourselves over our own heads and this is exactly what jake is feeling he's not struggling with how he looks i really wanna highlight this he's not struggling with how he looks he is wrestling with the belief that there's a better version of him and until he becomes that better looking version he's not worthy of love just stop and consider that because you do the same thing you say there's a better looking version of me and until i become that version and fix these things then i'm not worthy of the life and the experiences that i want do you know how heartbreaking that is to feel this way but never say it aloud i really have to applaud jake shane because he did and the moment he said it out loud as we were talking something shifted because when you name the thing that you're ashamed of even just once you take away its power to silently control you and it allows you to take 1 small powerful step toward the life you've been keeping yourself from living
so take a and just sit with everything that you and i have already talked about and while you sit with this i wanna take a quick break and have our amazing sponsors share a few words with you and while you're listening to our sponsors and you're thinking about what we've talked about so far if someone that you love needs to hear this and don't we all share this with them right now and don't go anywhere because when we return we're gonna go even deeper right to the heart of where these painful beliefs took hold and a little later we're gonna get to the 4 research back steps that help you learn how to love yourself
so stay with me we'll be right back welcome back it's your buddy mel robbins i am so glad you're still here that you're listening thank you for taking a moment to share this with people that you care about in just a little bit we're gonna be getting to the 4 steps you can take so that you feel confident today so that you can learn to accept yourself as you are instead of beating yourself up all the time because maybe the thing that you want like jake shane is a relationship or maybe you just wanna be able to post something on social media without a filter without immediately taking it down maybe you wanna be able to go out in public with no makeup wouldn't that be liberating or speak up at a meeting allow yourself to be seen even though you get a little flushed or go to your job without obsessing over whether or not people are looking at your acne or walk into a room without feeling self conscious about your height or your weight or the outfit that you're wearing whatever it is that you want whether it's love confidence or just the freedom to walk into a room without feeling
so critical of yourself whatever is holding you back probably isn't your body it's the way you feel about your body and the way you talk to yourself about it and that's exactly what jake shane and i got into next now just a heads up jake and i are buddies and you're gonna hear a little bit of back and and banter and playfulness a little bit of tough love we're gonna interrupt each other it's okay but i want you to listen closely to what jake shares because it is really important i'm a really confident guy but i do not like how i feel about my body and i don't like how i feel about how i look on the outside okay like
so like i'll look in the mirror and i'll like tape my sides and i'll like pull them back like this oh i've done that i would like to like just shave my sides off i like have a bigger like bosom area uh-huh so i would like that to be flatter uh-huh i've been working out my arms a lot but it it's not toned it's more just like bigger i'd like to shrink it
uh-huh
i don't like my chin i feel like i have kind of like a double chin i feel like i have a bump in my nose but that's like kinda the least of it and then i really might at the end of the day i hate how short i am i don't think it's fair re really and truly like i think more guys would want me if i was taller that is the at the end of the day what i think
do you wanna know why more guys don't want you why because you don't want yourself you're focused on height because it's distracting you from actually doing the work of learning how to look in the mirror right and say i am gonna do life with that guy like you only get to do life with 1 person from the moment you're born till the moment that you die you have 1 person to take care of it's you
yeah
it's you and so the best thing you could ever do for yourself is to learn how to look in the mirror and go alright this is what i got this is the hand i was dealt and there comes a point in time in life and i learned this so fucking late like it just i don't want you to do this to yourself
like you have to learn if you wanna be happier you have to learn how to allow yourself to
be happier and there's something about you and the way you won't allow yourself to be happier
yeah i don't know why
sometimes you don't have to yeah sometimes i think the step in changing your life is admitting to yourself that how you're doing it is no longer working you can be funny as hell and super successful and self deprecating and actually allow yourself to be happy with who and how you are i just feel unhappy i base all my happiness and
like other things that happen to me i am not happy like when i go to bed like i don't feel happy in my body i don't feel happy in myself mhmm i just don't
that is so relatable and so painful i don't feel happy in my body i don't feel happy in myself i just don't maybe you can relate to what jake is saying that when i go to bed at night i don't feel happy in my body i don't feel happy in myself and maybe you're confident maybe you got a full life you show up at work you're doing the best that you can but still there's this 1 thing that you can't stand and jake went on and on the bump in his no that's the least of it the boobs the fact that he wants to shave off his sides i've said the same thing about the saddlebags that are starting to hit you know those kind of things that hang down on your face as you get older the 1 thing you wish you could change if only i could get rid of that then i'd be happier the part of you that no matter what else is going on still makes you feel less than
so let me ask you something why do you do this to yourself why are you so quick to pick yourself apart why is it so hard to look in the mirror and just be okay with what you see you know i saw this video on tiktok that really made me start to look at this topic a little bit differently this video is from a young woman named avey her handle is beingandbecomingavi it's gone crazy viral i'm talking millions of views and she shared this concept called the mirror fallacy
now she didn't come up with the concept she was just sharing it online but it's the idea that human beings you and me we were never meant to constantly see ourselves and when you really think about it it makes total sense like think about our ancestors were our grandparents constantly looking at themselves no but you and me oh my god all we do is stare at ourselves between the constant zoom calls facetime calls selfies social media the photos that you're taking online school the tiktok videos that you're creating the reflections that you see in all the glass buildings around us constantly staring at yourself you're not meant to do that that's what's making you curate yourself judge yourself it's exhausting and here's the truth everybody feels the same way it's the world we live in in fact while we were working on this episode oh my gosh the discussions with the producing team here at 1 4 3 studios we have this incredible video director editor david love him he was telling us that he had this ordinary morning he was walking to work in boston he worked at this huge multinational corporation big glass gorgeous building you can imagine the type right and as he's walking into work just random day he catches his reflection in the window of the building and then he noticed something his knees the way his pants slightly bend inward as he walks and just like that it became a thing he couldn't stop seeing it he couldn't stop wondering do i walk weird do my legs look weird are my legs kind of bent in in a weird way he didn't even stop and consider is it this weird glass thing that's distorting it and it made him though feel off embarrassed uncomfortable in his body it made him wanna shrink and
so if you're listening to this and you know that thing whether it's the way your legs look when you walk or the you know something that happens with your shoulder when you're talking you're not alone and i'm here to tell you it's not your fault and i have science to back this up we were never meant to see ourselves as much not in the mirror not on zoom not in selfies not on videos not even reflected in the buildings we're walking past the truth is you're not wired for constant self surveillance you're wired for something else you're wired to be connected to other people and this is
so fascinating that i'm like okay what's the research here and so i wanted to go even deeper because you and i need help understanding why is all of this messing with our mind our body image and our self confidence so i called up our world renowned expert to help us understand and get additional insights into what is seeing yourself all the time in modern life doing to you now this is a woman who has led over 60 clinical research trials she focuses on the high functioning mental health issues that
so many people hide like anxiety and depression i'm talking about none other than doctor judith joseph and what she explained stopped me in my tracks it was something i had never heard before she said o'mel this is a phenomenon it's called the otoscopic phenomenon and it perfectly explains why you feel so self critical all the time here's how doctor judith explained it why it's harder than ever not just for you to shake the self criticism and the issues with body image check this out it's interesting because we were never made to look at ourselves all the time but
now we can't escape it we're on these virtual meetings we see ourselves while we're talking to other people we're you know doing facetime we see ourselves we're creating content we see ourselves and actually before we even had this ability to do this there was something called the otoscopic phenomenon and it's in the psychiatry world where actually it was considered to be a symptom of psychosis to see yourself outside of yourself so that actually creates so much anxiety for patients who let's say have psychosis like schizophrenia or psychotic symptoms related to bipolar disorder or other psychotic conditions and it's disturbing because because our brains and our eyes are made to look at other people and to judge their behavior and to get feedback from their behavior that's how our brains were set up our brains weren't set up to do that when looking at ourselves
so that's why this otoscopic phenomenon is really important to look at and we're seeing some of this happening in real life with people who aren't psychotic with people who don't have severe mental health issues where it's creating anxiety for them to be constantly looking at their own image it's just really unnatural
okay let's just take that in for a minute because that's incredible the human beings you and me we are actually not wired to see ourselves outside of ourselves and doctor judith wasn't done just get this next part that she explained
our eyes were designed to look at others and to judge others to adapt for example we were designed with a brain to look at someone's face their behavior look at where their hands are as a way to protect ourselves and also as a way to connect with others right if you're not able to look at someone to see whether or not they're burring you you know they're making little wrinkle hair or they're like looking sad you don't know how to respond to them in order to attach because humans need other people to survive
so because our brains were designed to only look at other people in order to either survive because of living with them or to survive by fleeing from them it's very unnatural for us to be looking at our own image because then what happens is that we start to judge ourselves which is unnatural we were never designed to be this way
that last line we were never designed to be this way we were actually not designed to judge ourselves we were designed to judge other people either for connection or to be like oh stay away from that person but now because we see ourselves all the time holy cow that judging mechanism we're now aiming it at ourselves and you've experienced this you know when you're on a zoom call or a facetime call and as you are talking or you're in a meeting you're thinking why does my face look like that i better change the angle you know there's even a center at stanford that studies this phenomenon
now they called it zoom fatigue which to me just sounds like your brain is tired but what doctor judith is actually saying is no no no no zoom fatigue is not just that your brain is tired zoom fatigue is that when you're staring at yourself you lose perspective you don't see yourself clearly you now start judging yourself and that's just the tip of the iceberg because now doctor ash is back from harvard medical school and she's gonna take this entire thing that we're learning even deeper check this out a study that was conducted during covid lockdown amongst nearly 7,000 people actually showed that people because they were constantly looking at pictures of themselves on videos and meetings nearly 30 percent of those individuals said that they had
so much anxiety about coming back in to in person meetings they were considering getting corrective actions such as plastic surgery so it goes to show you that as much as we are engaging in that process of social comparison between that real self and that idealized self it really has a powerful effect on our psyches and our mental health impossible anxiety and depression as it did in that case
you know
what i love about this conversation is that it seems like every problem in today's world is blamed on social media and i love that we're going deeper and understanding the deeper levers and drivers in terms of the way that you're hardwired and how it's backfiring because it's not just social media it's the constant taking of photos and the taking of videos it's the looking at yourself online no wonder anxiety is up no wonder confidence is down because it's not just about what you're seeing in the mirror you not only have this gap between the person that you are and this idealized version and then you start beating yourself up because you think you should look a different way but
now you add in the fact that you are seeing other people's filtered versions and highlight reels over and over and over again and so your idealized self is completely unattainable and on top of this you're not wired for this you're not supposed to see yourself and frankly you're not supposed to see everybody else all the time either and so i was really curious about how all of this is fueling and connected to the rise in body and face criticism why
so many people are turning to cosmetic procedures or these 70 step face routines so i went back to doctor judith joseph to get her take and i asked her doctor judith do you think the rise in body and face issues in terms of people criticizing themselves and feeling anxiety about how they look and the surge in cosmetic procedures does it have something to do with how we're constantly seeing ourselves and we're not designed to do this here's what she had to say
i've seen this over the years as someone who treats adults and children people going to constantly get procedures done painful procedures often unnecessary procedures that their doctors are like listen i don't see what you see but you know if it makes you happy you can make this adjustment with plastic surgery but it's never ending you know when we look at the science of happiness in my lab when you have this idea that i will be happy when and then you get the thing right you get the plastic surgery you're still not happy you're still looking for other things to fix i see this all the time when people are fixated on specific physical aspects of themselves that other people don't agree with and what i found in my practice is that this is almost always related to some trauma early in life and 1 of the symptoms of trauma is internalizing shame blame and low self worth
so the person's trying to fix this thing on the outside but it's really something that needs to be repaired on the inside in terms of their self worth but also society is showing us that there's this standard of beauty and if you don't fit it then you're not beautiful and because we have so much access to all of these images of other people who are beautiful we have way more metrics to compare ourselves again so it's a combination of unrepaired internal trauma and what we're seeing on the outside in terms of societal pressures why we're seeing these numbers go up in terms of the amount of procedures that are cosmetic you know i wanna highlight something about what doctor judith is explaining that's really important you think if you fix 1 thing on the outside you will finally feel better on the inside but it's never about the 1 thing that you see and look i'm not a psychiatrist luckily doctor judith is here and she dug into this even deeper to explain the connection between our obsession with how we look versus the deeper things that need healing that will actually make us happier check this out it's usually related to some early childhood or early life trauma and the person has instead of resolving that inner wound they have displaced this onto this external thing as humans we like to quantify we
so we focus on the concrete we focus on oh my legs are short or we focus on oh my toes are gross you know and we focus on these things my ears are big my chin sticks out and and these are the things that we can control because our concrete brains grasp onto them they're things that we can see as oh that's the problem and if i just fix this 1 thing it'll be better and i can tell you i've had these patients over the years where they'll get the surgery and they still find something else because it's not that 1 concrete physical thing it's something within that it's all tied to this unresolved wound i know you probably feel the same way that i do when these world renowned experts come on and tell us what we don't wanna hear because like you i am certain that if i just had longer hair or if i were just a little bit thinner or if my skin were a little bit clearer or my voice were a little bit deeper then all my problems would go away and that's not what the science and the research says at all what doctor judith and doctor asher saying is that we're chasing the wrong fix changing your appearance might give you a little boost but it's not gonna heal this feeling of being unworthy it's not gonna take care of that feeling that i just am not happy even though i did that thing to fix the thing that i thought i would fix because the wound was never physical to begin with and
so i'm sure you're thinking okay i'm in i get it what do i do about it i'm so glad you asked because we're gonna take a short break so we can hear a word from our amazing sponsors and while you're listening i want you to share this with somebody in your life that is too hard on themselves because they deserve to hear this conversation too and when we return you're gonna hear more from doctor judith and doctor ash because there are 4 research back steps that you're going to take in order to build a more confident and loving relationship with yourself and to start allowing happiness in
now so don't go anywhere i'll be waiting for you after this short break stay with
me
hey welcome back it's your friend mel i am so glad that you are still here with me because today you and i are talking about why you feel stuck when it comes to the things that you don't like about your face your body your appearance and that brings me to the 4 simple steps that according to doctor asch and according to doctor judith these are the research back steps that you need to take in order to break free from all of this criticism and start feeling better and accepting yourself today so let's talk about these 4 steps the 1 and the 1 we've already kinda covered but i really wanna take a highlight and make sure you understand you've already done step 1 and you've already done step 2 and step 1 is acknowledge that the world you live in today the culture that's the problem you're not the problem k you are not the problem it's the world and the culture that we live in the world that you live in is set up in a way to make you feel dissatisfied with yourself the selfies the videos the snapchats the zoom calls the facetime calls you're constantly exposed to images of yourself and as you're learning you're not designed to see yourself you are designed to see and connect with other people to scrutinize what they're doing in order to know if there's somebody you wanna connect with or there's somebody you wanna stay away from and
so when you see yourself which you're not designed to do automatically that same scrutiny kicks in so it's not just the sheer number of photos either i mean think about what happened during the pandemic when everything shifted to video suddenly every meeting every conversation every class on camera that means you had to stare at yourself all day long and when you're constantly staring at yourself you're also constantly judging yourself but here's the truth there's nothing wrong with you you don't need a different face you don't need a different body you need a different relationship with the body the face and the life you already have turn off the camera get off social media and if you're unwilling to get off social media how about you audit who you follow because if your feed is filled with photoshopped models and influencers living a fake life trying to sell you stuff that's not helping because step 1 starts with understanding this you're not the problem today's culture is the problem because it's screwing up how your brain is designed to move through the world and what you're supposed to be looking at doesn't it feel good to say oh it's not me i'm perfectly imperfectly beautiful there's only 1 me period and step 2 you have to look back before you can move forward i'm a say that again you have to look back before you can move forward and here's where this connects back to you figuring out where your own negative self talk started is key because here's what i know to be true here is what doctor judith and doctor ash said over and over you didn't come into this world hating your body you were not born picking yourself apart in a mirror all that shame all that self judgment all that criticism all of that belief that something is wrong with how you look it was taught to you maybe it came from a kid at school who made fun of your nose maybe it was a comment from a family member about your weight that stuck like glue maybe it was somebody constantly fussing with the way that you dressed or your teeth or your skin or whatever maybe it was the pressure of growing up online and constantly scrolling past people that you thought looked better than you or whose life looked better than yours and you started to tell yourself well that's what beauty is supposed to look like but here's what i want you to know and this is good news if it was taught it can be unlearned mhmm if you learn to hate yourself you can learn to love yourself if somebody else taught you to criticize yourself or to make you believe that you were not good enough because of how you looked you can unlearn this crap and you need to and part of that unlearning is understanding why you became
so critical in the place that's where the healing begins and those roots may go a lot further back than you realize and in order to prove this let's go back to our buddy jake shane what he shares next is not just about body image it's about the exact moment shame gets planted and how fast it grows when you're not willing to talk about it so i asked jake where did you get the idea that there was something wrong with your body and this is what jake shane had to say someone made a comment when i was in or grade and it really stuck with me what did they say that i was fat k and i was it in a situation too where you guys were all like getting undressed in a i don't know what i forget i was wearing a rasgard i think yeah it was horrible and then i really lived my life on the internet for my entire life i spent my entire life on the internet my parents i love them for this
let me watch whatever i wanted to at a young age like i was i was introduced to what sex is yes based on like a multimillion dollar movie so those men are ripped
oh got it okay yep
so that's what i'm thinking like a normal person looks like and then also in the gay scene it's very very very body focused so and like i i don't really know i just i always felt like my body was weird and watching people on tv i still felt like it was weird and then because of that like i then had a weird relationship with food and i'm like do like okay i like abs are made in the kitchen so like i'm just gonna eat a lot less and then i eat like and then i end up binging and i just like i just have a horror at at the end of the day i just have a horrible relationship with my body i just have to give jake a huge shout out for being dishonest about the way that this has played out in his life and what has triggered him to basically look at other people and go oh i don't look like that therefore i don't belong and i'm not good enough and i need to change if i want the positive things in my life and you know he's talking about how being made fun of for his body being called fat maybe you were called fat and then constantly seeing idealized images on tv and social media completely shaped the way he saw himself and his worth
now remember it's about who you are for real versus the idealized version and so the teasing and the images that he sees on tv and social media is what created the idealized version you have the same thing because it's not just shay shayne that struggles with this it happens to you too happens to all of us let me give you an example i i already said that as we were creating this episode our entire team was talking about the topic and we all could come up with an example i'll give you another 1 1 of our producers cameron who is producing this episode shared a moment from when she was in grade she walked into school in morning and the school secretary made a comment about a birthmark that she has on her face
now that might not seem like a big deal to an adult but to a kid in grade that comment changes everything it makes you feel super self conscious because somebody's talking about it and here's what most people don't realize the brain of a child is different from the brain of an adult and if you're young and someone points something out what's that why do you walk like that what's up with your teeth why is your skin
so how how come you have so many freckles do you burn what is that thing on your face wow you got short legs how are you so tall your hair is kinda kinky it just lands in a way that imprints because what happens when somebody points something out is they're basically saying you look different there's something wrong with you and when you're a kid you don't have the tools to question it so what do you do you absorb it so again think about that thing that part of you that you hate that thing that you obsess over that you wish you could change if only this thing which if only my stomach if only my thighs if only my butt was a bubble butt and wasn't like flappy pancakes or maybe if my butt was flat and not a bubble butt like we all have a moment just like cameron's just like jake's and sure as an adult you kinda shrug it off you say ah it doesn't happen a long time ago i'm fine but when you're a kid it mattered alright it is part of this gap that we're talking about and there's a reason why it matters
now to figure this out and so let's go back to doctor judith our world renowned psychiatrist because i asked her why do these early experiences stick with us so deeply and impact us as adults and this is what doctor judith has to say
i've had so many patients over the years where they focus on 1 thing like i've had patients who you know who and it and it affects women and men equally boys and girls equally usually starts in adolescence at that tender age you're looking for acceptance you're that's when the you know there are these stages of development eric erickson where around that pre predescent age you're just trying to figure out where you fit in life but if someone is mean enough or even if they didn't realize they were being mean to point out that that made you unlovable or unacceptable that adolescent brain views rejection as being like physically stabbed
so when you like look at the brain of an adolescent who's being rejected and ridiculed the same parts of the brain light up as if you were being like killed you know versus adults it's not as intense so that is why bullying is so problematic because when you're that young being accepted is so important because that's when you're building your identity and who you are and if you had that a major wound during that time and someone says you're not loved because you're short or you're ugly or you're fat or you're like fake funny face and then you're rejected because of it that sticks with you it not only sticks with you it becomes part of the wiring for why you are constantly harping on yourself that's what i meant when i said you weren't born this way somebody taught you to think this way and the good news about recognizing that somebody else taught you to reject yourself is that you can unlearn it and that's why before we can go forward we gotta go backward and really identify this is not how i talked to myself when i was little this is how some jerks talk to me and then i just adopted it and it's important to really understand that this fused because she just told you that when this happens to a child a child's ridiculed or rejected when you were ridiculed or rejected as a child the brain lights up the same way as it does when you're physically injured and it's important to understand that because you don't just brush it off it becomes part of the wiring in the belief system that's how real this is and
so i'm sure you're thinking okay i'm i i got this it's culture's problem i'm not designed to stare at myself check step 1 step 2 i gotta go backwards and accept the fact that somebody taught me to criticize myself and i'm now gonna unlearn it so what is step 3 well for step 3 we are going to go to doctor ash because now that you've traced the roots of it i want you to do something different and it's important for you to understand that the tool that you're about to use doctor ash has been using in her clinical practice for over 20 years in the harvard medical school system and
so let's hear from doctor ash what she wants you to do because what she's about to share is powerful and in order to stop rejecting yourself you have to build a belief system that is rooted in self compassion and self acceptance and we gotta delete the shame so check out what doctor ash has to say
i can tell you i've been practicing for nearly 20 years now seeing patients and i've observed that whatever people bring to the table anxiety depression trauma panic there are always core beliefs a core belief is the fundamental ingrained beliefs that people have that give rise to all the other elements of negative self talk it's kind of like the trunk of a tree right the root that's there the tree gives rise to the branches and the leaves and all the negative thoughts emerge from them the 3 most common core beliefs are i am lovable i am unworthy i am helpless and what we have to do is as i mentioned in training our minds to challenge those beliefs in cognitive behavioral therapy what you learn to do is engage in cognitive restructuring what you have to do in cognitive restructuring is start questioning the core beliefs or the underlying thought do you have to turn that inner self critic on the inner self critic if that makes any sense you have to start questioning the questioning and what do you get when you put 2 negatives together a positive
so let's say that person who's really unhappy with themselves what if you practice with them this cognitive restructuring where you say what's the evidence for that are you thinking based on your facts or your feelings and what could you think in place of that thought that's where self compassion and affirmation also comes in affirmations are these alternative thoughts or beliefs that we can have about ourselves everyone needs at least 1 affirmation i'll tell you personally my affirmation is keep going just keep going okay everyone needs to have underlying thought that's alternative it's an alternative to the core belief and they think in place of the oral core belief but it has to be believable can't be somebody else's you gotta ask yourself what can i say to myself that i can believe that i can really get behind and say in place of the negative vulnerabilities
now i do wanna point out these are strategies that take practice and they take time and they take energy you have to do it every single day
i'm glad that she said that because you have been repeating this self criticism every single day and so if you've been doing this your entire life you gotta give it more than a week okay this is not like i say this once this has to become the new pattern and so this is the tool that doctor ash has been using for over 20 years and that tool is let's create a meaningful mantra okay you ready number 1 it must be something you believe right
now we're not gaslighting we are reprogramming and number 2 it must give you a feeling of relief even if it's just like a and the reason why this is so important is because you're so used to criticizing yourself so that if you're like i love my body i love myself your brain's gonna be like no we don't we have been criticizing ourselves for 20 years i don't believe that garbage so you gotta start with something real k you have to say something you truly believe and
so let me give you some examples of meaningful mantras some of the things that doctor ash uses i'm getting better every day today is gonna be a good day i'm proud that i'm trying to be kinder to myself i can do things that feel difficult i can stop criticizing myself i deserve to feel good about myself i deserve to look in the mirror and see a person that i care about i am a good person i try really hard every day i am doing my best if i learn to be kinder to myself the world's gonna open up to me notice something doesn't matter if your pants fit doesn't matter if you've made mistakes doesn't matter if you have wrinkles or not if you have acne or freckles these statements are still true you are a good person you do deserve to feel good in your body you are practicing being kinder to yourself you do deserve to have somebody see the best in you and
so when you say these tiny little things don't you feel a little relief i mean it feels so much better than trashing yourself that right there that's all you need to do that is just a little toe opening up the door to help you rewire your brain 1 small mantra 1 small thought 1 moment of grace at a time because that's how real change happens little by little as you choose to lift yourself up instead of constantly tearing yourself down and let's move on to step number 4 and step number 4 is you gotta stop waiting and start living and at this point in the conversation i feel like i have permission to be direct with you you're gonna hate step number 4 and you're gonna hate it because you have been waiting you've been holding yourself back from really enjoying your life and experiencing all that your life has to offer and going for it in life every single time you stand in the back of the photo every time you don't post your art or your real estate business every time you decline an invitation because you don't wanna be seen at the beach or you cancel a date because you're having a bad breakout on your face or you're worried about being intimate because you don't want somebody to see how you're gonna look in the morning without your makeup or you sit silently at work because you think your voice sounds weird and
so you don't wanna say something that's really what today's conversation is about every 1 of these examples is you not allowing yourself to live your life you know it's not other people that are judging you when you stop yourself from living your life fully you're the 1 judging yourself think about that when you cover up your acne scars with filters that's judgment when you stand in the back of the photo that's judgment when you sit silently at work and don't speak up that's judgment when you cancel the date or you cancel the plans because you just don't like how you look that's judgment and you've probably brushed it off like oh there's no big deal it is a big deal because every time you hide every time you avoid every time you silence yourself you're rejecting yourself you're saying i'm not good enough to be seen you're saying i don't belong up front you're saying this person is probably gonna reject me if i show up on a date and i look like my normal self
so i'm gonna reject myself by covering up what i actually look like i get it you think that somebody's gonna judge you the truth is you've already judged yourself that's why this is awful and i want you to really sit with that the weight of that because it's heartbreaking but if you can be honest with yourself if you can come up with like what's a way that you're keeping yourself from fully living your life and enjoying it i don't go to the beach because i don't wanna be in a bathing suit if you can be honest this insight is empowering because if you have the power to reject yourself you also have the power to support yourself and i want you to hear doctor ash because she's adamant that you gotta stop waiting and start living
now as you are this step is the key to healing and to taking your life back check out what she has to say
when we expose ourselves we then become desensitized to our underlying thoughts and beliefs right so let's say you've got a fear of spiders until you touch a spider and you're around the spider you're not going to be able to convince yourself that spiders are okay and that has to do with again the primordial brain remember when i told you that self criticism is a function of evolutionary adaptation and this idea that we're going to remember the fear and we're going to sense the fear and that's going to be ingrained in our brains we have to expose ourselves to be able to desensitize ourselves to those underlying thoughts because you see our brain evolved right we then developed our cortical and frontal lobe structures okay and that's when we started having all those tightly held beliefs that you mentioned
so you gotta go back to the primordial brain and expose yourself so i'm gonna take that person i'm gonna drag them to the beach and then i'm gonna make them document how many people are actually judging them and when they found out that people are not judging them okay that's gonna be an exposure i'm gonna ask them about the evidence what what's the evidence that someone is actually judging you tell me convince me turn the inner self critic on the self critic and you're not gonna wanna do this because you have spent years telling yourself oh i need to lose weight in secret before i can exercise in public if you have been waiting to change until you'll put a bathing suit on in front of your friends go to the pool party apply for the job regardless of what your voice sounds like walk into the room even though you're not sure you belong go to the damn beach for crying out loud start standing in the front of the photos smile at somebody in the checkout line forget about the good or bad side just jump in the photo because acceptance doesn't start with a mirror it starts with permission giving yourself permission to stand at the front of the photo permission to wear the damn swimsuit permission to be short and date everybody and love yourself every step of the way permission to show up without shrinking without apologizing i mean that's where everything begins to shift when you stop holding this impossible standard over your head and you start living your life by the way the life that's been waiting for you all along because you're not here to keep repeating the old story the crap people told you when you were 12 or you were 16 or 18 you're here to interrupt that garbage and finally start writing a news story because here's what the research shows the number 1 predictor of how happy and fulfilled you are has nothing to do with your weight your skin your success your appearance nothing nothing number 1 predictor self acceptance mhmm happiness is tied to how kind you are to yourself because if you can't be kind to yourself
now while you have acne while you're the height that you are while your hair is not the style that you want it to be you're not gonna magically be kind to yourself later period and this is what doctor judith's research shows too she has this groundbreaking happiness lab where she's doing all this research and i want you to hear what doctor judith has to say about why you cannot keep delaying your happiness and why you need to start accessing joy right
now
a lot of the research shows that when people delay happiness until right i'll be happy when i grow taller i'll be happy when i no longer have acne i'll be happy when i lose 5 pounds or 10 pounds or whatever it is you still won't be happy when you get those things and it requires a a shift small shifts instead of delaying start to access points of joy every day this is you know what my research is based on how do you access the points of joy
so for someone who struggles with the way they look and being able to at at least have some love in life what are the things that actually make you feel relaxed you know because being relaxed and less stressed is actually a point of joy because this person sounds like they worry a lot so what are the things that you are grateful for you know are you someone who helps people every day are you someone who is a good listener that's a point of joy are you someone who you know likes to have savory meals sit and eat and taste the flavors right because a lot of times when you delay happiness for things that may happen in the future you're still not going to be happy even if you grow tall you're still not gonna be happy and i think that it's really helpful to look at these testimonies from people who are you know in their nineties or eighties or close to you know
moving on from this earth the things that they regret most aren't things like i wish i were tall or i wish i were beautiful it's you know i wish i learned that to play that piano because i love music or i wish i saw that sunset 1 more time or you know i wish i spent time with the people that i love they're not thinking man like if i had 5 more minutes on this earth i'd like to have less acne
that hits doctor judith that hits alright it's true isn't it if you had 5 more minutes left you wouldn't wish for clearer skin you wouldn't want longer legs or a flatter stomach you would have wished you would allowed yourself to live more you would have wished you would allowed yourself to be happy to have gone for the greatest love you wish you would have laughed more been present for the moments that mattered instead of up in your head picking yourself apart what doctor judith said right there that's the shift that's what we're actually talking about it's
so much bigger than learning how to stop criticizing we're actually talking about how to learn how to allow yourself to be happy and look you're not alone everybody criticizes themselves everybody holds this over their heads but now you're empowered now you know there is a different future that is waiting for me right now because every time that you show up for yourself and you build that kind of relationship with yourself and you allow yourself to experience life you allow joy and love to come in nobody can take that away from you and that is a beautiful thing and in case no 1 else told you today i also wanted to be sure to tell you that i love you i love you exactly as you look right
now exactly as you are right now to me you are perfectly imperfectly beautiful i believe that and i also believe in you i believe in your ability to create a life that is better better a life where you feel accepted by yourself and after everything that you learned today holy cow you have the advice you have all this new insight you have tools you have the truth and now it's time for you to put it into practice and i hope you do as your friend i really hope you do alrighty i'll see you in the very
next episode i will be waiting to welcome you in the moment you hit play these glasses are still so dirty the arrow goes down in that way so there you go
god you do
you know who created this a man yes there we go a little bit bigger for grandma over here i am binge watching white lotus season 3 and i have 2 more episodes to go so don't don't blow it my biggest pet peeve that's gonna be so fun great job everybody bye guys excellent job what a great episode oh and 1 more thing and no this is not a blooper this is the legal language you know what the lawyers write and what i need to read to you this podcast is presented solely for educational and entertainment purposes i'm just your friend i am not a licensed therapist and this podcast is not intended as a substitute for the advice of a physician professional coach psychotherapist or other qualified professional got it good i'll see you in the
next episode
stitcher